So welcome Andrej,
I'm really glad you could join me today.
>> Yeah, thank you for having me.
>> So a lot of people already know
your work in deep learning, but
not everyone knows your personal story.
So let us start by telling us,
how did you end up doing all
these work in deep learning?
>> Yeah, absolutely.
So I think my first exposure to deep
learning once when I was an undergraduate
at the University of Toronto.
And so Geoff Hinton was there, and
he was teaching a class on deep learning.
And at that time, it was restricted both
from machines trained on and these digits.
And I just really like the way Geoff
talked about training the network,
like the mind of the network,
and he was using these terms.
And I just thought there
was a flavor of something
magical happening when this
was training on those digits.
And so that's my first exposure to it,
although I didn't get into it
in a lot of detail at that time.
And then when I was doing my master's
degree at University of British Columbia,
I took a class with and
that was again on machine learning.
And that's the first time I delved
deeper into these networks and so on.
And what was interesting is
that I was very interested in
artificial intelligence, and so
I took classes in artificial intelligence.
But a lot of what I was seeing
there was just very not satisfying.
It was a lot of depth-first search,
breadth-first search, alpha-beta pruning,
and all these things.
And I was not understanding how,
I was not satisfied.
And so when I was seeing neural networks
for the first time in machine learning,
which is this term that I
think is more technical and
not as well known in most people
talk about artificial intelligence.
Machine learning was more a technical
term, I would almost say.
And so I was dissatisfied
with artificial intelligence.
When I saw machine learning, I was like,
this is the AI that I want to spend time
on, this is what's really interesting.
And that's what took me down
those directions is that this is
almost a new computing paradigm,
I would say.
Because normally, humans write code, but
here in this case,
the optimization writes code.
And so you're creating
the input/out specification,
and then you have lots of examples of it,
and then the optimization writes code, and
sometimes it can write
code better than you.
And so I thought that was just a very new
way of thinking about programming, and
that's what intrigued me about it.
>> Then through your work, one of
the things you've come to be known for
is that you're now this human benchmark
for the image classification competition.
How did that come about?
>> So basically, their ImageNet
challenge is it's sometimes compared to
the world cup of computer vision.
So whether people are going to care
about this benchmark and number,
our error rate goes down over time.
And it was not obvious to me where
a human would be on this scale.
I've done a similar smaller scale
experiment on CIFAR-10 dataset earlier.
So what I did in CIFAR-10 dataset is I was
just looking at these 32 x 32 images, and
I was trying to classify them myself.
At the time,
this was only ten categories, so
it's fairly simple to
create an interface for it.
And I think I had an error
rate of about 6% on that.
And then based on what I was seeing and
how hard a task was,
I think I predicted that the lowest
error rate we'd achieve would be.
Look, okay,
I can't remember the exact numbers.
I think, I guess, 10%, and we're now
down to 3 or 2% or something crazy.
So that was my first fun
experiment of human baseline.
And I thought it was really important for
the same purposes that you point
out in some of your lectures.
I mean, you really want that number to
understand how well humans are doing it,
so we can compare machine
learning algorithms to it.
And for ImageNet, it seems that there was
a discrepancy between how important this
benchmark was and how much focus there
was on getting a lower number and
us not even understanding how
humans are doing on this benchmark.
So I created this JavaScript interface,
and I was showing myself the images,
and then the problem with ImageNet is
you don't have just 10 categories,
you have 1,000.
It was almost like a UI challenge.
Obviously, I can't remember 1,000
categories, so how do I make it so
that it's something fair?
And so I listed out all the categories,
and I gave myself examples of them.
And so for each image, I was scrolling
through 1,000 categories and
just trying to see, based on the examples
I was seeing for each category,
what this image might be.
And I thought it was an extremely
instructed exercise by itself.
I mean, I did not understand that a third
of ImageNet is dogs and dog species,
and so that was interesting to
see that network spends a huge
amount of time caring about dogs, I think.
A third of its performance
comes from dogs.
And yeah, so this was something
that I did for maybe a week or two.
I put everything else on hold.
I thought it was a very fun exercise.
I got a number in the end, and then I
thought that one person is not enough.
I wanted to have multiple other people,
and so
I was trying to organize within the lab
to get other people to do the same thing.
And I think people are not as willing
to contribute, say like a week or
two of pretty painstaking work, just like
yeah sitting down for five hours and
trying to figure out
which dog breed this is.
And so I was not able to get
enough data in that respect, but
we got at least some approximate
performance, which I thought was fun.
And then this was picked up, and
it wasn't obvious to me at the time.
I just wanted to know the number,
but this became like a thing.
[LAUGH] And people really liked
the fact that this happened, and
refer to jokingly as the reference human.
And of course,
that's hilarious to me, yeah.
[LAUGH]
>> Were you surprised when software,
finally surpassed your performance?
>> Absolutely.
So yeah, absolutely.
I mean, especially, sometimes it's really
hard to see in the image what it is.
It's just like a tiny blob of a black
dot is obviously somewhere there.
And I'm not seeing.
I'm guessing between like 20 categories,
and the network just gets it, and
I don't understand how that comes about.
So there's some superhumanness to it.
But also, I think the network is extremely
good at these kind of statistics of
work types and textures.
I think in that respect, I was not
surprised that the network could better
measure those fine statistics
across lots of images.
In many cases, I was surprised because
some of the images require you to read.
It's just a bottle, and
you can't see what it is, but
it actually tells you what it is in text.
And so as a human, I can read it, and it's
fine, but the network would have to learn
to read to identify the object,
because it wasn't obvious from it.
>> One of the things you've
become well-known for, and
that the deep learning community
has been grateful to you for,
has been your teaching the class and
putting that online.
Tell me a little bit about
how that came about.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
So I think I felt very
strongly that basically,
this technology was transformative in
that a lot of people want to use it.
It's almost like a hammer.
And what I wanted to do,
I was in a position to randomly hand
out this hammer to a lot of people.
And I just found that very compelling.
It's not necessarily advisable from
the perspective of the PhD student,
because you're putting
your research on hold.
I mean, this became like 120% of my time.
And I had to put all of
research on hold for
maybe, I mean, I thought the class twice,
and each time, it's maybe four months.
And so that time is basically spent
entirely on the class, so it's not
super advisable from that perspective, but
it was basically the highlight of my PhD.
It's not even related to research.
I think teaching a class was
definitely the highlight of my PhD.
Just seeing the students,
just the fact that they're real excited,
it was a very different class.
Normally, you're being taught things
that were discovered in 1800 or
something like that.
But we were able to come to class and say,
look, there's this paper from a week ago,
or even yesterday.
And there's new results, and
I think the undergraduate students and
the other students, they just really
enjoyed that aspect of the class and
the fact that they actually understood.
So this is not nuclear physics or
rocket science.
This is you need to know calculus,
and then your algebra, and
you can actually understand everything
that happens under the hood.
So I think just the fact that it's so
powerful, the fact that it keeps changing
on a daily basis, people felt right
they're on the forefront of something big.
And I think that's why people
really enjoy that class a lot.
>> And you've really helped a lot
of people and had a lot of hammers.
>> Yeah.
>> As someone that's been
doing deep learning for
quite some time now,
the field is evolving rapidly.
I'd be curious to hear,
how has your own thinking,
how has your understanding of deep
learning changed over these many years?
>> Yeah, it's basically like when I was
seeing Restricted Boltzmann machines for
the first time on DIGITS.
>> It wasn't obvious to me how this
technology was going to be used and
how big of a deal it would be.
And also, when I was starting to work in
computer vision, convolutional networks,
they were around, but they were not
something that a lot of the computer
vision community participated
using anytime soon.
I think the perception was that
this works for small cases but
would never scale for large images.
>> And that was just extremely incorrect.
[LAUGH] And so basically, I'm just
surprised by how general technology is and
how good the results are.
That was largest surprise,
I would say, and it's not only that.
So that's one thing that it worked so
well on, say, like ImageNet.
But the other thing that I think
no one saw coming, or at least for
sure I did not see coming, is that you
can take these pretrained networks and
that you can transfer.
You can fine tune them on
arbitrary other tasks.
Because now,
you're not just solving ImageNet, and
you need millions of examples.
This also happens to be very
general feature extractor, and
I think that's a second insight that
I think fewer people saw coming.
And there were these papers,
they are just locked here.
All the things that people have
been working on in computer vision.
Sync classification,
actual recognition, object recognition,
base attributes and so on.
And people are just crushing each
task just by fine tuning the network.
And so that, to me, was very surprising.
>> Yes, and somehow I guess supervised
learning gets most of the press, and
even though pretrained fine-tuning or
transfer learning is actually working
very well, people seem to talk
less about that for some reason.
>> Right, exactly.
Yeah, I think what has not worked as much
is some of these hopes are on unsupervised
learning, which I think has been really
why a lot of researchers have gotten into
the field in around 2007 and so on.
And I think the promise of that has
still not been delivered, and I think I
find that also surprising is that the
supervised learning part worked so well.
And the enterprise learning,
it's still in a state of, yeah,
it's still not obvious how it's going
to be used or how that's going to work,
even though a lot of people
are still deep believers,
I would say to use the term, in this area
>> So I know that you're
one of the persons who's been thinking
a lot about the long-term future of AI.
Do you want to share
your thoughts on that?
>> So I spent the last maybe year and
a half at OpenAI thinking
a lot about these topics, and
it seems to me like the field
will split into two trajectories.
One will be applied AI, which is just
making these neural networks, training
them, mostly with supervised learning,
potentially unsupervised learning.
And getting better, say,
image recognizers or something like that.
And I think the other will be artificial
general intelligence directions, which
is how do you get neural networks that are
entirely dynamical system that thinks and
speaks and can do everything that a human
can do and has intelligent in that way.
And I think that what's been interesting
is that, for example in computer vision.
The way we approached it in the beginning,
I think,
was wrong in that we tried to
break it down by different parts.
So we were like, okay, humans recognize
people, humans recognize scenes,
humans recognize objects.
So we're just going to do
everything that humans do,
and then once we have all those things,
and now we have different areas.
And once we have all those things,
we're going to figure out
how to put them together.
And I think that was a wrong approach,
and we've seen how that going to
played out historically.
And so I think there's something similar
that's going on that's likely on a higher
level with AI.
So people are asking, well, okay,
people plan, people do experiments to
figure out how the world works, or people
talk to other people, so we need language.
And people are trying to decompose it
by function, accomplish each piece, and
then put it together
into some kind of brain.
And I just think it's
just incorrect approach.
And so what I've been a much bigger
fan of is not decomposing that way but
having a single kind of neural network
that is the complete dynamical system
that you're always working
with a full agent.
And then the question is,
how do you actually create objectives
such that when you optimize over
the weights that make up that brain,
you get intelligent behavior out?
And so that's been something that I've
been thinking about a lot at OpenAI.
I think there are a lot
of different ways that
people have thought about
approaching this problem.
For example,
going in a supervised learning direction,
I have this essay online.
It's not an essay,
it's a short story that I wrote.
And the short story tries to come up with
a hypothetical world of what it might look
like if the way we approach this AGI is
just by scaling up supervised learning,
which we know works.
And so that gets into something that looks
like Amazon Mechanical Turk where people
associates into lots of robot bodies,
and they perform tasks, and
then we train on that as a supervised
learning dataset to imitate humans and
what that might look like, and so on.
And so then there are other directions,
like unsurprised learning from algorithmic
information theory, things like AIXI,
or from artificial life, things that'll
look more like artificial evolution.
And so that's what I spend my
time thinking a lot about.
And I think I had the correct answer,
but I'm not willing to reveal it here.
[LAUGH]
>> I can at least learn more by reading
your blog post.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
>> So you've already given out
a lot of advice, and today,
there are a lot of people still wanting to
enter the field of AI into deep learning.
So for people in that position,
what advice do you have for them?
>> Yeah, absolutely.
So I think when people talk to me about
CS231n and why they thought it was a very
useful course, what I keep hearing again
and again is just people appreciate
the fact that we got all the way
through the low-level details.
And they were not working with
the library, they saw the real code.
And they saw how everything
was implemented, and
implemented chunks of it themselves.
And so just going all the way down and
understanding everything under you,
it's really important to
not abstract away things.
You need to have a full
understanding of the whole stack.
And that's where I learned the most myself
as well when I was learning this stuff
is just implementing it myself from
scratch was the most important.
It was the piece that I felt gave
me the best kind of bang for
the buck in terms of understanding.
So I wrote my own library.
It's called ConvNetJS.
It was written in Javascript, and it
implements convolutional neural network.
That was my way of learning
about application.
And so that's something that I keep
advising people is that you not work with
flow or something else.
You can work with it once you have written
at something yourself on the lowest
detail, you understand everything under
you, and now you are comfortable to.
Now, it's possible to use some these
frameworks that abstract some of it away
from you, but
you know what's under the hood.
And so that's been something
that helped me the most.
That's something that people appreciate
the most when they take 231n, and
that's what I would
advise a lot of people.
>> So rather than run neural network,
and it'll all happen like that.
>> Yeah, and in some kind of sequence of
layers, and I know that when I add some
dropout layers, it makes it work better,
like that's not what you want.
In that case, you're not going
to be able to debug effectively,
you're not going to be able to
improve on models effectively.
>> Yeah, with that answer, I'm really glad
that deep learning course got AI course.
It starts a lot with many weeks of Python
programming first and then [INAUDIBLE].
>> Yeah, good, good.
>> Thank you very much for
sharing your insights and advice.
You're already heroes of many people
in the deep learning world, so
I'm really glad, really grateful
you could join us here today.
>> Yeah, thank you for having me.